feat: migration("re-indexing"), backfilling and diasgnostics tooling for the `ChainIndexer` (#12450)
filecoin-project/lotus: chain/index/chain-indexing-overview-for-rpc-providers.MD

# ChainIndexer Documentation for RPC Providers
  
## Introduction

This document is for RPC providers and node operators who serve RPC requests walking through the configuration changes, migration flow and operations/maintenance work needed to enable, backfill and maintain the `ChainIndexer`.

> **Note: If you are a Storage Provider or node operator who does not serve RPC requests, you can skip this document as the `ChainIndexer` is already disabled by default**. 

Reviewer: (i.e: if FEVM.EnableEthRPC = false for your node, you can skip this doc

 

## ChainIndexer Config
### Enablement

The following must be enabled on an RPC node before starting as they are disabled by default:

```toml
[ChainIndexer]
# Enable the ChainIndexer. 
  EnableIndexer = true 

[Fevm]
# Enable the ETH RPC APIs.

>   EnableEthRPC = true

Reviewer: what happens if i have a node that has enable eth rpc set to true, and i restart the node with the new release that with this PR without changing the default config for EnableIndexer (which will be set to false)?

Author: @jennijuju You will still store event logs in your chain state(so they can be indexed later when you enable the Indexer without re-computing the tipset) but none of the txns,events and messages will be indexed which means that RPC calls will either fail or be really slow.

You can then later turn on `ChainIndexer` and do a back-fill to get that state into the Index.

Reviewer: hrm so the migration is mandatory..? i assume you cant keep both system for a while and deprecate the old indexing system w/o duplicating a lot of code? Then what's the point of introducing ` EnableIndexer`? cuz it seems like enable eth rpc  + enable actor event -> must be enableiindexer?

Reviewer 2: I think that's a good/valid question @jennijuju .

@aarshkshah1992 : is there a usecase to have `EnableEthRC == true && EnableActorEventsAPI == true` but `EnableIndexer == false`?  if not, then it seems like `ChainIndexer.EnableIndexer` could be removed and implicitly be enabled.

(That said, I assume this is useful to have a config flag, either for clarity and/or testing purposes.)

Reviewer 3: Last I looked I think ChainIndexer was doing roughly the same as we have for now wrt this: you can `EnableEthRPC` which will enable `RealTimeFilterAPI` and enable "HistoricFilterAPI", which I think is the same for `EnableActorEventsAPI`. for you, but you can run with `DisableHistoricFilterAPI` set to `true`. This means that your node will extract events from tipset execution and serve them up with "real-time" APIs ("subscribe" and the eth "filter" APIs) but you can't ask for anything historic.

I'm not entirely convinced the cost of the confusion about this is worth allowing for that use-case. It seems like users don't like the eth subscribe and filter APIs and prefer to be explicit with getting logs for certain epochs and polling. I don't think I've even seen anyone use subscribe or filter APIs in practice! Not that my experience is broad.

Reviewer 3: Either way, this doc should clearly outline the behaviour, because it's confusing and is worth some prose.

Reviewer: ( @rvagg in the last couple month you have been working with indexer providers and explorer like tool builders the most and they need all events. That said, dapp builders , often only care about the event their contracts emits and they use subscribe mostly; another filecoin example is client contract deals - SP softwares will filter for specific deal proposal events and react to those accordingly. So yah there is definitely an important user base for those api

Reviewer 2: I'm moving this to https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

  GCRetentionEpochs = X  # Replace X with your desired value
```

- Setting `GCRetentionEpochs` to 0 (**default**) disables GC.
- Any positive value enables GC and determines the number of epochs of historical data to retain.

#### Recommendations

1. **Archival Nodes**: **Keep GC disabled** (`GCRetentionEpochs` = 0) to retain all indexed data.

2. **Non-Archival Nodes**:  Set `GCRetentionEpochs` to match the amount of chain state your node retains 
(*Example:* if your node is configured to retain 2 days of Filecoin chain state with the Splitstore, set `GCRetentionEpochs` to `retentionDays * epochsPerDay = 2 * 2880 = 5760`).
**Warning:** Setting this value below the chain state retention period will degrade RPC performance and reliability because the Index will lack data for epochs still present in the chain state.  

### Removed Options

**Note: The following config options no longer exist in Lotus and have been removed in favor of the ChainIndexer config options explained above. They can be removed when upgrading to Lotus v1.31.0.**

```toml
[Fevm]
EthTxHashMappingLifetimeDays = 0

[Events]
DisableHistoricFilterAPI = false
DatabasePath = ""
```

## Migration Guide

> Migrating to the new `ChainIndexer` involves several steps to ensure a smooth transition:

Reviewer: Should the first step, especially for those who kept a large history of index, to back up their existing index sqlite db? I think it is important for archival indexer provider  to be able to rollback by (1) downgrade their lotus) (2) load the index db back upon node restart (3) have a functional node with existing system  without have to refill everything to minimize the service interruption due to indexer upgrade failuer

Now that i learnt that the migration and api switch is mandatory. For indexer providers,  I think it is particularly crucial for archival indexer providers instruction should start with `Back up the existing index SQLite database before updating your node to v1.3x.0`.

And we need to make the rollback strategy to be more robust as well..
- Downgrade Lotus to the previous version.
- Restore the backed-up index database upon node restart.
- Resume operations with the existing system, avoiding the need to refill all data.

This process is necessary to minimize service interruptions in case of unforeseen issues during the indexer upgrade.

Author: @jennijuju 

"avoiding the need to refill all data."

-> This will need us to build something like re-conciliation for all the existing Indices (there are three of them). Reconciliation is a complex process and investing the time to build it on top of a broken Indexing system is not something I agree with. This is a rare case that can be handled by the existing backfilling tooling we have.

Reviewer 2: @jennijuju : I think there is some misunderstanding:

Lotus <1.31.0
Indexes live in LOTUS_HOME/sqllite

Lotus >=1.31.0 (which this PR will be part of)
Indexes live in LOTUS_HOME/chainindex

A user doesn't need to take a backup because we don't touch their old files.  Assuming they don't wipe away their old files, they can just downgrade to previous Lotus version and cary on.  No backup taking or restoring needed since we never touched the pre-1.31.0 data.  So I think we're good here procedurally.

I am happy to take fresh eyes later to look to see if we can communicate this better.  I can also jump into Fil Office to verbally sync.

Reviewer: @BigLep i see & thanks for spotting the misunderstanding, i also noticed that it is mentioned in the later section "_It's recommended to keep the legacy directory around until you've confirmed you don't need to [rollback](#rollback)._"

It could be nice to call this out sooner and flag to operators they should make sure there is enough disk space for a separate db (if the db is small, then we can neglect this point).

and their should be another step added in this session "X confirms a successful migration, and you can remove the legacy index by doing Y once you get that confirmation

Reviewer: (i think the key misunderstanding from my side the use of the word "migration", where in the past most index migration we have done was to migrate the existing DB to a new schema (and they were.. scary).  this seems like i fell into the 🕳️ of having too much historical context and I don't think we necessarily need to change anything here to communicate this better to the user..

Reviewer 2: This is good feedback @jennijuju and makes sense.  I pushed some changes to hopefully make this clearer.  Can you please look at the file again (or the diff: https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12450/files/47e421f1f3e16c08f3b51a9f4da256a6876357d8..926852a538d50b40e8bdac552215aa3912526f90 )?

1. **Stop the Lotus Node**
   - Stop your Lotus node before starting the upgrade and migration process.

>    - 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this was left over and can be removed.

2. **Update Configuration**
   - Modify your Lotus configuration to enable the `ChainIndexer` as described in the [`ChainIndexer Config` section above](#chainindexer-config).

3. **Restart Lotus Node**
   - Restart your Lotus node with the new configuration.
   - The `ChainIndexer` will begin indexing **real-time chain state changes** immediately in the `${LOTUS_PATH}/chainindex` directory.
   - **However, it will not automatically index any historical chain state (i.e., any previously existing chain state). To perform backfilling, please see the [`Backfilling` section below](#backfilling).**

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Note: The ChainIndexer will write state to `${LOTUS_HOME}/chainindex` rather than the [removed option](#removed-options) for `Events.DatabasePath` (which defaulted to `${LOTUS_HOME}/sqllite`).  It's recommended to keep the legacy directory around until you've confirmed you don't need to [rollback](#rollback).
```

I'm thinking to be clear about the sqllite directory and when you can get rid of it.

> Note: The ChainIndexer will write state to `${LOTUS_HOME}/chainindex` rather than the [removed option](#removed-options) for `Events.DatabasePath` (which defaulted to `${LOTUS_HOME}/sqllite`).  It's recommended to keep the legacy directory around until you've confirmed you don't need to [rollback](#rollback).

Reviewer: would be nice to link to the new chainindex schema! i.e one mega database

Reviewer 2: I added this.  Resolving.

> # ChainIndexer Documentation for RPC Providers

Reviewer 3: this file should probably be in documentation/en/, also note the extension `.MD` -> `.md`

  
## Introduction

This document is for RPC providers and node operators who serve RPC requests walking through the configuration changes, migration flow and operations/maintenance work needed to enable, backfill and maintain the [`ChainIndexer`](#chainindexer-indexing-system).

> **Note: If you are a Storage Provider or node operator who does not serve RPC requests (i.e, if `Fevm.EnableEthRPC = false`), you can skip this document as the `ChainIndexer` is already disabled by default**. 

Reviewer 3: Some nuance is needed here - everyone running a Lotus node serves RPC requests, SPs use lotus as an RPC endpoint for their miner (lotus-miner or curio).

Something like "externally-available RPC" or "public API", or "RPC other than for internal consumption", or even better, target this document at those requiring: "high-performance RPC", which may include some SPs.

As we move forward, SPs are likely going to need some of this functionality anyway—consider PDP which is smart-contract mediated, they're going to need eth_getLogs and friends, so turning this on might start to make sense. 

So, limiting this to "RPC providers" is probably not the best because (a) that term isn't precise enough and (b) there's grey area about who it might make sense to use this. You could even introduce a section that describes the functionality so it helps people decide for themselves.

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

## ChainIndexer Config
### Enablement

> The following must be enabled on an RPC node before starting as they are disabled by default:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following must be enabled on an Lotus node before starting as they are disabled by default:
```

let's be careful with "RPC"

```toml
[ChainIndexer]
# Enable the ChainIndexer. 
  EnableIndexer = true 

[Fevm]
# Enable the ETH RPC APIs.
  EnableEthRPC = true

[Events]
# Enable the Actor Events APIs.
  EnableActorEventsAPI = true
```

> You can learn more about these configuration options and other configuration options available for the `ChainIndexer` [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/documentation/en/default-lotus-config.toml).

Reviewer 3: A relative link would probably be good for this, no?

Also I think this doc should go in that same directory so it should be even easier.

### Garbage Collection

> The `ChainIndexer` includes a garbage collection (GC) mechanism to manage the amount of historical data retained. By default, GC is disabled to preserve all indexed data.

Reviewer 3: Can we give a very rough estimate of growth to help with informed decisions here? e.g.:

"At the time of writing, ChainIndexer will accumulate approximately 120MiB per day of data".

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

To configure GC, use the `GCRetentionEpochs` parameter in the `ChainIndexer` section of your config.

> The ChainIndexer [periodically runs](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/chain/index/gc.go#L15) GC if `GCRetentionEpochs` is > 0 and removes indexed data for epochs older than `(current_head_height - GCRetentionEpochs)`.

Reviewer 3: this link will suffer from bitrot, best to leave it out I think.

```toml
[ChainIndexer]
  GCRetentionEpochs = X  # Replace X with your desired value
```

- Setting `GCRetentionEpochs` to 0 (**default**) disables GC.
- Any positive value enables GC and determines the number of epochs of historical data to retain.

#### Recommendations

1. **Archival Nodes**: **Keep GC disabled** (`GCRetentionEpochs` = 0) to retain all indexed data.

2. **Non-Archival Nodes**:  Set `GCRetentionEpochs` to match the amount of chain state your node retains 

> (*Example:* if your node is configured to retain 2 days of Filecoin chain state with the Splitstore, set `GCRetentionEpochs` to `retentionDays * epochsPerDay = 2 * 2880 = 5760`).

Reviewer 3: Splitstore is based on size target, not days, so we need to help them here. I think on average it works out to be ~2 days by default at the moment so so the recommendation is OK, but they're not going to say "I've configured it for X days" because they won't. Most likely they just turned splitstore on and crossed their fingers because splitstore config is confusing.

"Example: If your node is configured to use splitstore with the default thresholds, you are likely retaining 2-3 days worth of data. So you could set ..."

Zen or Orjan may be able to say something more certain about periods here. Just checking on my mainnet node and I have 2.3 days worth of block history.

Reviewer 3: I've love this config setting to be able to track splitstore rather than be rough like this. But I think you looked into that?

Author: @rvagg Yes that is incredibly complex to get right because the Splitstore is a beast with multiple knobs that I do not fully understand (I doubt anyone does). So best not to make any suggestions about something we don't understand well ourselves.

Reviewer 3: ok, but for that reason, _"if your node is configured to retain 2 days of Filecoin chain state with the Splitstore"_ isn't helpful because nobody configures it like this, so you need to say something here to align with how splitstore works

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

**Warning:** Setting this value below the chain state retention period will degrade RPC performance and reliability because the Index will lack data for epochs still present in the chain state.  

### Removed Options

**Note: The following config options no longer exist in Lotus and have been removed in favor of the ChainIndexer config options explained above. They can be removed when upgrading to Lotus v1.31.0.**

```toml
[Fevm]

> EthTxHashMappingLifetimeDays = 0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
EthTxHashMappingLifetimeDays = 0
  [Events]
  DisableHistoricFilterAPI = false
```

see note in #12421, this one is duplicated with a `moved` redirect

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

[Events]
DisableHistoricFilterAPI = false
DatabasePath = ""
```

## Upgrade Steps

> > **Note:** One can upgrade/downgrade between [pre-ChainIndexer](#previous-indexing-system) and [with-ChainIndexer](#chainindexer-indexing-system) Lotus versions without conflict because they persist state to different directories and don't rely on each other. No backup is necessary (but extra backups don't hurt).  

Reviewer 3: yeah .. but it's more complicated than this, because if you go back to a pre-ChainIndexer version then you'd need to backfill to fill in the holes you created in the period you were running the with-ChainIndexer version. I think you need to document this somewhere because you can't just hand-wave at this problem for people.

Which reminds me that we really should fix backfill _now_ for that logIndex bug. I'll go do that.

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

Upgrading to the new `ChainIndexer` involves these steps:

1. **Stop the Lotus Node**
   - Stop your Lotus node before starting the upgrade and migration process.
2. **Update Configuration**
   - Modify your Lotus configuration to enable the `ChainIndexer` as described in the [`ChainIndexer Config` section above](#chainindexer-config).
3. **Restart Lotus Node**

>    - Restart your Lotus node with the new configuration.

Reviewer 3: upgrade your lotus node version in here too?

   - The `ChainIndexer` will begin indexing **real-time chain state changes** immediately in the `${LOTUS_PATH}/chainindex` directory.

>    - **However, it will not automatically index any historical chain state (i.e., any previously existing chain state). To perform backfilling, please see the [`Backfill` section below](#backfill).**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - **However, it will not automatically index any historical chain state (i.e., any previously existing chain state prior to the upgrade). To perform backfilling, please see the [`Backfill` section below](#backfill).**
```

> > **Note:** It's recommended to keep the [pre-ChainIndexer](#previous-indexing-system) state directory around until you've confirmed you don't need to [downgrade](#downgrade).  After sustained successful operations after the upgrade, the [pre-ChainIndexer](#previous-indexing-system) state directory can be removed to reclaim disk space.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note:** It's recommended to keep the [pre-ChainIndexer](#previous-indexing-system) indexing database directory (`${LOTUS_PATH}/sqlite`) around until you've confirmed you don't need to [downgrade](#downgrade).  After sustained successful operations after the upgrade, the [pre-ChainIndexer](#previous-indexing-system) indexing database directory can be removed to reclaim disk space.  
```

## Backfill

> There is no migration from [pre-ChainIndexer indices](#previous-indexing-system) to the [ChainIndex](#chainindexer-indexing-system) because the [pre-ChainIndexer indices](#previous-indexing-system) are not fully reliable.  Instead one needs to index historical chain state (i.e., backfill) using one of the following tools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no automated migration from [pre-ChainIndexer indices](#previous-indexing-system) to the [ChainIndex](#chainindexer-indexing-system) because the [pre-ChainIndexer indices](#previous-indexing-system) are not fully reliable.  Instead one needs to index historical chain state (i.e., backfill) using one of the following tools.
```

Reviewer 2: I think this was my addition.  I've been assuming it's not possible to go from pre-ChainIndexer 3 dbs to ChainIndexer DB because we don't have certainty that previous system is void of holes.  If we think it would be possible to bootstrap ChainIndexer from the previous DBs, we may want to look into that because I assume that would drastically reduce the upgrade time for archival nodes.  (Thread on this: https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/issues/12453#issuecomment-2403463045 )

Author: 1) We don't have the confidence that the old Indexing system/DBs have the correct data. We've fixed multiple bugs in the old Indexing system over the past few months but we still see report of holes/missing data/mismatched event index counts etc. See recent complaints by Oku and Forrest as examples.  I do not feel confident bootstrapping the new Index from the old one because this is our chance to get it right.

2) This backfilling is a one time cost. If an RPC provider is running multiple nodes, they only need to do it on one node and can then simply copy over the Index. The new Index DB copy can also be shared among RPC providers if there is a trust relationship.

3) The schemas of the old fragmented Indices dont's easily/natuarally map to the schema of the new Index. There will be additional work/data wrangling to get this right.

I would like to make a strong push back against the idea of using the old Indices for filling up the new one just to avoid having to pay a one time cost per RPC provider given the low degree of confidence in the consistency/correctness in the old Indices. That lack of consistency/correctness in the fragmented DBs is what led us to doing this workstream in the first place.

Author: Also -> this is only for Archival nodes not for snapshot synced nodes. For snapshot synced nodes with only a portion of the chain state (who only serve queries going back a few days) -> it will be much faster.  See https://filecoinproject.slack.com/archives/CP50PPW2X/p1727862474601319.

Reviewer 2: I'll bring this into https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

> > **Note:** The ChainIndex will consume ~10GB of storage per month of tipsets (e.g., ~86400 epochs).  Ensure you have sufficient disk space before proceeding.

Reviewer 3: ahh, see my point above about giving them an estimate for helping them to decide on GC, but do this by day

> ### `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `ChainValidateIndex` RPC API
```

or just "API" too, also see your uses of "JSON" below, they're not necessary and the JSON bit is transparent to many (most?) users

Reviewer 2: This may have been me.  I went with this terminology because:
1. It matches website naming: https://docs.filecoin.io/reference/json-rpc and https://lotus.filecoin.io/reference/basics/api-access/#go-json-rpc-client
2. Distinguish from ETH RPC API

I agree that "JSON" as a qualifier isn't great.  In the fullness of time, I assume we'd want to call this "Filecoin Node API" (based on https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1027 ), or maybe this is a Lotus-specific API so it should be called `Lotus Node API`?

Reviewer 3: yeah, this won't be part of the "Common Node API", it'll never be exposed on the gateway for example

I'd be happy just with "API", but "RPC API" seems palatable too

Please refer to the [Lotus API documentation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/documentation/en/api-v1-unstable-methods.md) for detailed documentation of the `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API.

The `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API serves a dual purpose: it validates/diagnoses the integrity of the index at a specific epoch (i.e., it ensures consistency between indexed data and actual chain state), while also providing the option to backfill the `ChainIndexer` if it does not have data for the specified epoch. 

The `ChainValidateIndex` RPC API is available for use once the Lotus daemon has started with `ChainIndexer` [enabled](#enablement). 

> Here are some examples of how to use the `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API for validating/ backfilling the index:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are some examples of how to use the `ChainValidateIndex` API manually with `curl` for validating/ backfilling the index (note there is a `lotus-shed` form of this for ease of use, see below):
```

how about we not scare them with curl up front? "you mean I need to curl each epoch I want to backfill?????"

Reviewer 3: I also wonder if this is just too much detail for users, do they care about this? This whole manual `curl` section could even be an appendix if someone wanted to built out their own tooling, but really, who's going to do this? Can they not _trust us_?

Reviewer 2: Good callout.  I'll move it down / out of view.

Reviewer 2: Will handle in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12450

The `lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill` command is a tool for validating and optionally backfilling the chain index over a range of epochs since calling the `ChainValidateIndex` API for a single epoch at a time can be cumbersome, especially when backfilling or validating the index over a range of historical epochs, such as during a migration. It wraps the `ChainValidateIndex` API to efficiently process multiple epochs.

**Note: This command can only be run when the Lotus daemon is already running with the [`ChainIndexer` enabled](#enablement) as it depends on the `ChainValidateIndex` RPC API.**

#### Usage:
```
lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill --from <start_epoch> --to <end_epoch> [--backfill] [--log-good]
```

The command validates the chain index entries for each epoch in the specified range, checking for missing or inconsistent entries(i.e. the indexed data does not match the actual chain state). If `--backfill` is enabled (which it is by default), it will attempt to backfill any missing entries using the `ChainValidateIndex` API.

You can learn about how to use the tool with `lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill -h`.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

Note: If you are using a non-standard Lotus repo directory then you can run the command with `lotus-shed -repo /path/to/lotus/repo chainindex validate-backfill ...`, or by setting the `LOTUS_PATH` environment variable.

```

## Downgrade

In case you need to downgrade to the [previous indexing system](#previous-indexing-system), follow these steps:

1. Stop your Lotus node.

> 2. Build your Lotus binary for the rollback version which has the implementation of the old `EthTxHashLookup`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Download or build a Lotus binary for the rollback version which has the implementation of the old `EthTxHashLookup`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices.
```

4. Ensure that you've set the correct config for the existing `EthTxHashLookup`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices in the `config.toml` file.
5. Restart your Lotus node.
6. Backfill the `EthTxHashLookup`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices using the `lotus-shed index backfill-*` CLI tooling available in the [previous indexing system](#previous-indexing-system) for the epoch range in [epochs between the upgrade to `ChainIndexer` and the rollback of `ChainIndexer`].

## Terminology
### Previous Indexing System
* This corresponds to the indexing system used in Lotus versions before v1.31.0.  
* It has been replaced by the [ChainIndex](#chainindexer-indexing-system).

> * It was composed of three indexers using three separate databases: [`EthTxHashLookup`](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/chain/ethhashlookup/eth_transaction_hash_lookup.go), [`MsgIndex`](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/chain/index/msgindex.go), and [`EventIndex`](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/chain/events/filter/index.go).

Reviewer 3: I think these links are going to go away when you merge, so you could just leave them off I think, code links for users isn't usually very useful

Reviewer 2: This was me.  I was thinking to update them to v1.30.0 tag.  I had them as a way to give a pointer for someone to look at what was actually happening.  I was ok with it because it didn't obscure things for the reader of the rendered markdown, while giving a self-service way for someone to learn more if they wanted to.

Reviewer 3: ok, tagging wouldn't be terrible I guess

I still question the utility of pointing people at code, but it's not a blocker if you think it preferable

Reviewer 2: Handling in https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/pull/12600

> * It persisted state to the [removed option](#removed-options) for `Events.DatabasePath`, which defaulted to `${LOTUS_HOME}/sqllite`.

Reviewer 3: `s/LOTUS_HOME/LOTUS_PATH/g` in this doc, there's no `LOTUS_HOME`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* It persisted state to the [removed option](#removed-options) for `Events.DatabasePath`, which defaulted to `${LOTUS_HOME}/sqlite`.
```

# ChainIndexer Documentation for RPC Providers

# Table of Contents

> 

Author: @BigLep Added TOC.

Reviewer 2: Thanks.  Although I'm realizing we don't really need this if this goes in Lotus docs since it renders a toc on the right hand side: 
https://lotus.filecoin.io/lotus/developers/local-network/
<img width="247" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d8cb3c00-d83e-41a3-af3e-611367012c12">

Anyways, I guess we can leave for now until it moves over but we don't need to worry about finessing it (other than making sure our overall document structure is good).

Author: Removed this as we don't need it.

> - [ChainIndexer Documentation for RPC Providers](#chainindexer-documentation-for-rpc-providers)

Reviewer 2: Nit but I think this can be removed.  Assuming you're using markdown-all-in one, you can use `<!-- omit in toc -->`

https://markdown-all-in-one.github.io/docs/guide/table-of-contents.html#hiding-headings-from-toc

Author: Done.

Author: Removed TOC as discussed above.

  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [ChainIndexer Config](#chainindexer-config)
    - [Enablement](#enablement)
    - [Garbage Collection](#garbage-collection)
      - [Recommendations](#recommendations)
    - [Removed Options](#removed-options)
  - [Migration Guide](#migration-guide)
    - [Backfilling](#backfilling)
      - [The `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API](#the-chainvalidateindex-json-rpc-api)
      - [`lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill` CLI tool](#lotus-shed-chainindex-validate-backfill-cli-tool)
        - [Usage](#usage)
        - [Parameters](#parameters)
        - [Error conditions](#error-conditions)
        - [Logging](#logging)
        - [Example usage](#example-usage)

>   - [Rollback](#rollback)

Reviewer 2: Indent one more level so this is under Migration Guide?  I think that make sense: two main sections: backfilling, rollback.

Author: The grammar is strong with this one 🤟

Author: Done.

  - [Need more help?](#need-more-help)

## Introduction

> This document is aimed at RPC providers and node operators who serve RPC requests and aims to walk through the configuration changes, migration flow and operations/maintenance work needed to enable, backfill and maintain the `ChainIndexer`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document is for RPC providers and node operators who serve RPC requests walking through the configuration changes, migration flow and operations/maintenance work needed to enable, backfill and maintain the `ChainIndexer`.
```

Got rid of the double "aim".
Reduced words.

**Note: If you are a Storage Provider or node operator who does not serve RPC requests, you can skip this document as the `ChainIndexer` is already disabled by default**. 
 

## ChainIndexer Config
### Enablement

The following must be enabled on an RPC node before starting as they are disabled by default:

```toml
[ChainIndexer]
# Enable the ChainIndexer. 
  EnableIndexer = true 

[Fevm]
# Enable the ETH RPC APIs.
  EnableEthRPC = true

[Events]
# Enable the Actor Events APIs.
  EnableActorEventsAPI = true
```

> You can learn more about these configuration options and other configuration options available for the `ChainIndexer` [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/documentation/en/default-lotus-config.toml).

Author: Link will have config docs for the `ChainIndexer` once we merge this to master.

Reviewer 2: It would be sweet if you could link to a certain section into a toml file by section name.  For example, I wish I could do https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/documentation/en/default-lotus-config.toml#chainindexer .  I know that isn't possible.
Resolving this converation.

### Garbage Collection

The `ChainIndexer` includes a garbage collection (GC) mechanism to manage the amount of historical data retained. By default, GC is disabled to preserve all indexed data.

To configure GC, use the `GCRetentionEpochs` parameter in the `ChainIndexer` section of your config.

> The ChainIndexer periodically runs GC if `GCRetentionEpochs` is > 0 and removes indexed data for epochs older than `(current_head_height - GCRetentionEpochs)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ChainIndexer [periodically runs](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/chain/index/gc.go#L15) GC if `GCRetentionEpochs` is > 0 and removes indexed data for epochs older than `(current_head_height - GCRetentionEpochs)`.
```

Linking to the source of truth for where someone can learn how frequently this runs.

```toml
[ChainIndexer]
  GCRetentionEpochs = X  # Replace X with your desired value
```

- Setting `GCRetentionEpochs` to 0 (**default**) disables GC.
- Any positive value enables GC and determines the number of epochs of historical data to retain.

#### Recommendations

1. **Archival Nodes**: **Keep GC disabled** (`GCRetentionEpochs` = 0) to retain all indexed data.

> 2. **Non-Archival Nodes**:  Set `GCRetentionEpochs` to match the amount of chain state your node retains 

Author: Done.

DisableHistoricFilterAPI = false
DatabasePath = ""
```

## Migration Guide

Migrating to the new `ChainIndexer` involves several steps to ensure a smooth transition:

1. **Stop the Lotus Node**
   - Stop your Lotus node before starting the upgrade and migration process.

2. **Backup Existing Index Databases**
   - Before restarting your Lotus node, back up the directory containing your existing index databases (`MsgIndex`, `EthTxIndex`, and `EventIndex`).
   - These databases are located in the `{$LOTUS_PATH/sqlite}` directory.
   - Use the following command to copy the entire directory:
     ```bash
     cp -r $LOTUS_PATH/sqlite {destination_path}
     ```
   - **Note: If you have configured a custom directory path for the Index databases using the `Events.DatabasePath` config option, replace `{$LOTUS_PATH/sqlite}` with your custom path.**
   - These backups are essential for potential rollbacks, even though they are not used in the migration process.

3. **Remove Old Index Files**
   - After creating backups, remove the `{$LOTUS_PATH/sqlite}` directory (*or your custom index database path*) using the following command:
     ```bash
     rm -rf $LOTUS_PATH/sqlite
     ```

>    - **Warning: Please ensure and validate that you have made backups of your existing index databases before removing the directory.**

Author: This is done.

4. **Update Configuration**
   - Modify your Lotus configuration to enable the `ChainIndexer` as described in the [`ChainIndexer Config` section above](#chainindexer-config).

5. **Restart Lotus Node**
   - Restart your Lotus node with the new configuration.
   - The `ChainIndexer` will begin indexing **real-time chain state changes** immediately.
   - **However, it will not automatically index any historical chain state (i.e., any previously existing chain state). To perform backfilling, please see the [`Backfilling` section below](#backfilling).**

### Backfilling
To index historical chain state (i.e., **"backfilling"**), you can use the following tools:

#### The `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API

> Please refer to the [Lotus API documentation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/blob/master/documentation/en/api-v1-unstable-methods.md) for detailed documentation of the `ChainValidateIndex` JSON RPC API.

Reviewer 3: again this could be a relative link

curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "Filecoin.ChainValidateIndex",
  "params": [1995103, false],
  "id": 1
}' http://localhost:1234/rpc/v1 | jq .

{
  "error": {
    "code": 1,
    "message": "missing tipset at height 1995103 in the chain index, set backfill flag to true to fix"
  },
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0"
}

3) Validating the Index for an epoch for which the Indexer has missing data with backfilling enabled:

curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" --data '{
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "method": "Filecoin.ChainValidateIndex",
  "params": [1995103, true],
  "id": 1
}' http://localhost:1234/rpc/v1 | jq .
 
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "TipSetKey": [
      {
        "/": "bafy2bzacebvzbpbdwxsclwyorlzclv6cbsvcbtq34sajow2sn7mnksy3wehew"
      },
      {
        "/": "bafy2bzacedgei4ve3spkfp3oou5oajwd5cogn7lljsuvoj644fgj3gv7luamu"
      },
      {
        "/": "bafy2bzacebbpcnjoi46obpaheylyxfy5y2lrtdsyglqw3hx2qg64quip5u76s"
      }
    ],
    "Height": 1995103,
    "IndexedMessagesCount": 0,
    "IndexedEventsCount": 0,
    "Backfilled": true,
    "IsNullRound": false
  }
}
```

> The `ChainValidateIndex` RPC API  is available for use once the Lotus daemon has started with `ChainIndexer` [enabled](#enablement). 

Author: Done.

#### `lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill` CLI tool

> The `lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill` command is a tool for validating and optionally backfilling the chain index over a range of epochs since calling the `ChainValidateIndex` API for a single epoch at a time can be cumbersome, especially when backfilling or validating the index over a range of historical epochs, such as during a migration. It wraps the `ChainValidateIndex` API to efficiently process multiple epochs.

Author: @BigLep I think we should keep this here as there is no "canonical" doc to link to for the `lotus-shed`CLI.

We do have canonical docs for the "JSON RPC API/Config" but none for the `lotus-shed` CLI. 

We can link to the "usage description/help description" of the command contained in the implementation file for the command if we want to here.

Author: Done.

#### Parameters:
- `--from` (required): The starting epoch (inclusive) for the validation range. Must be greater than 0.
- `--to` (required): The ending epoch (inclusive) for the validation range. Must be greater than 0 and less than or equal to `from`.
- `--backfill` (optional, default: true): Whether to backfill missing index entries during validation. 
- `--log-good` (optional, default: false): Whether to log details for tipsets that have no detected problems.

#### Error conditions:
- If `from` or `to` are invalid (<=0 or `to` > `from`), an error is returned.
- If the `ChainValidateIndex` API returns an error for an epoch, indicating an inconsistency between the index and chain state, an error message is logged for that epoch.

#### Logging:
- **Progress is logged every 2880 epochs (1 day worth of epochs) processed during the validation process.**
- If `--log-good` is enabled, details are also logged for each epoch that has no detected problems. This includes:
  - Null rounds with no messages/events.

>   - Epochs with a valid indexed entry.

Author: Done.

#### Example usage:

To validate and backfill the chain index for the last 5760 epochs (2 days) and log details for all epochs:

```
lotus-shed chainindex validate-backfill --from 1000000 --to 994240 --log-good 
```

This command is useful for backfilling the chain index over a range of historical epochs during the migration to the new `ChainIndexer`. **It can also be run periodically to validate the index's integrity.**

## Rollback

> 

Author: @BigLep @rjan90 

Added rollback docs here.

In case you need to rollback to the previous indexing system (`EthTxIndex`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex`), follow these steps:

1. Stop your Lotus node.

> 2. Remove the current `${LOTUS_PATH}/sqlite` directory and replace it with the backup taken in the "**Backup Existing Index Databases**" section of the [Migration Guide](#migration-guide).

Reviewer 2: Related to previous discussion, this step goes away if we just write chainindexer sql state to somewhere else.

> 2. Remove the current `${LOTUS_PATH}/sqlite` directory and replace it with the backup taken in the "**Backup Existing Index Databases**" section of the [Migration Guide](#migration-guide).

Author: Would love to know what @rvagg thinks about this. Writing the chainindexer sql state to another directory makes sense to me as it does simplify migration ops.

> 2. Remove the current `${LOTUS_PATH}/sqlite` directory and replace it with the backup taken in the "**Backup Existing Index Databases**" section of the [Migration Guide](#migration-guide).

Reviewer 2: @aarshkshah1992 : @rvagg and I spoke verbally on 2024-09-25 (my time) and he was supportive of this idea of writing chainindexer sqllite in a different directory.

3. Build your Lotus binary for the rollback version which has the old `EthTxIndex`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` Indices.
4. Ensure that you've set the correct config for the existing `EthTxIndex`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices in the `config.toml` file.
5. Restart your Lotus node.
6. Perform backfilling for the `EthTxIndex`, `MsgIndex`, and `EventIndex` indices using the `lotus-shed index backfill-*` CLI tooling available in the previous indexing system for the epoch range in [epochs between the upgrade to `ChainIndexer` and the rollback of `ChainIndexer`].

## Need more help?

> Please free to ask questions on `#fil-lotus-dev` on Filecoin Slack or create issues on [Lotus GitHub](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/issues) for any questions/bugs/comments/concerns.

Author: Removed this from the doc as agreed that it's really a generic comment/"self service discoverable".
